---
title: Microprocessor Design in Verilog
summary: The purpose of this lab is to implement a THUMB processor with multiple pipeline stages that executes the given C-programs assembled for the ARM THUMB instruction set in Verilog. This processor features a 5 stage pipeline,hazard detection and dataforwarding.The CPU runs at a maximum frequency of 2.857 GHz.

tags:
- Verilog
- ARM
- Pipelined Processor
date: "2017-04-27T00:00:00Z"

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).
external_link: ""

image:
  caption: Photo by rawpixel on Unsplash
  focal_point: Smart

links:
- icon: twitter
  icon_pack: fab
  name: Follow
  url: https://twitter.com/itsmekhallu
url_code: ""
url_pdf: ""
url_slides: ""
url_video: ""

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this project with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
slides: example
---

Introduction
============

Motivation
----------

The purpose of this lab is to implement a THUMB processor with multiple pipeline stages that executes the given C-programs assembled for the ARM THUMB instruction set in Verilog.Appropriate attention is taken to reduce the clock cycles for lower instruction latency.The features of this processor are 5 stage pipeline,hazard detection and data
forwarding.The processor is designed such a way that the CPU runs at a
maximum frequency of 2.857 GHz.

Project Summary
---------------

Major milestones defined as per the project have been completed.
Following table gives a short summary of our design and goals achieved.

  **Feature**           | **Value/Result**
  ----------------------| ------------------
  Number of Stages      | 5
  Synthesizable         | Yes
  Max Frequency         | 2.857 GHz
  Power                 | 2.0583 mW
  Can process count32   | Yes
  Can process memcpy46  | Yes


Implementation
==============

Design
------

For the simulation of CPU program, the given data files which contains
the instructions were read into the instruction register of the CPU.The
processor designed is a 5 stage pipeline design. The stages are
Instruction Fetch, Instruction decode,Execute,Memory Access and Write
back.

The instruction fetch stage is where a program counter will pull the
next instruction from the current location in to the program memory. In
addition the program counter was updated with either the next
instruction location sequentially or the instruction location as
determined by a branch.

The instruction decode stage the control unit determines the values for
the control lines that must be set to process the instruction. The
decoded register addresses are sent to the register file and the data in
the resister is passed to the ALU inputs.

The opcode that is been fetched is sent to the ALU for execution.If
required,branch addresses are also calculated and the forwarding unit
determines whether the output of the ALU or the memory unit should be
forwarded to the ALU inputs.For this purpose a 2:1 Multiplexer is used.

In the Write back stage, calculated values are written back to the
specific registers or memory.

The CPU also contains a hazard detection block to determine when a stall
cycle must be added.This is enabled when the output of a previous load
instruction is required for the current execution.The hazard detection
block will also prohibit the program counter from updating itâ€™s next
calculated value.

Forwarding unit monitors the output of ALU and system memory and
determines whether this value has to be given as a ALU input.If the
recently calculated value is needed in the current execution before it
is written to the register file it will be sent to the appropriate ALU
input.

{{< figure src="Images/Figure5.png" title="Source: <span>[@CDACpipe]</span>" >}}


Functional Description
----------------------

##### Pipeline

The Pipelined model is an architecture which allows throughput of the
processor to be increased dramatically by reusing the idle stages during
processing of instructions.All the stages of a pipeline are executed in
parallel with Registers inserted between the stages. This enables
several operations to take place simultaneously, and the processing and
memory systems to operate continuously[@TDMI_DS].The stages in the
pipeline are instruction fetch, decode, execute and writeback.

### Instruction Fetch Stage

The instruction fetch stage is responsible for reading the instruction
memory and sending the next instruction to the next stage in pipeline,or
a stall if a branch has been detected in order to avoid incorrect
execution. It consist of three components : instruction memory, program
counter.

#### Program Counter

The program counter is incremented by 2 after every instruction is
executed. In cases where a jump is required the PC is modified directly
by the output of ALU via a multiplexer.

### Instruction Decode Stage

In decode stage the fetched instruction is decoded and it is responsible
for assigning the different sections of instructions into their proper
representation based on different instruction types.The decode stage
consist of control unit, the hazard detection unit , the sign extender
and the register file, and is responsible for connecting all these
components together. It splits the instruction into various parts and
feeds them into the corresponding components.Registers Rn and Rm are fed
to the register file, the immediate data is fed to the sign extender,
and the ALU opcodes and the function codes are sent to the control unit.
The output of these corresponding components are clocked and then stored
for next stage.The codes used in the decode section are listed in the
table.


  **Opcode**  | **Instruction or instruction class**
  ------------| -----------------------------------------------------------
  00xxxx      | Shift (immediate), add, subtract, move, and compare
  010000      | Data-processing
  010001      | Special data instructions and branch and exchange
  01001x      | Load from Literal Pool, see LDR (literal)
  0101xx      | Load/store single data item
  10100x      | Generate PC-relative address
  10101x      | Generate SP-relative address, see ADD (SP plus immediate)
  1011xx      | Miscellaneous 16-bit instructions
  1101xx      | Conditional branch, and Supervisor Call
  11100x      | Unconditional Branch

  : Source: <span>[@arm_manual]</span>

### Control Unit

Control is the hardware that tells the datapath what to do, in terms of
switching, operation selection, data movement between ALU components
[@Patterson].It takes the given opcode from the instruction and
translate into individual instruction control lines needed for the
remaining stages.All control signals can be set based on the opcode
bits.

### Hazard Detection and Forwarding Unit

Hazard occurs when we read a value that was just written from memory,as
the value wont be available for execution until the end of the memory
stage. It introduces stall cycle by replacing control lines with zero
and disabling the program counter from updating. When a branch is
detected the hazard detection unit will allow the program counter to
write, but will feed it the branch address instead of the next counted
value.

The forwarding unit is responsible for choosing what input is to be fed
into the ALU.It takes the input from the decode stage ,the value that
the ALU has fed to the write back stage as well as the register numbers
corresponding to all of these and determines if there is any conflict
exist.It will decide which of this values must be send to ALU.


![Source:
<span>[@Patterson]</span>](Images/examle_of_hazard.jpg)

![Source:
<span>[@Patterson]</span>](Images/example_of_stall_insertion.jpg)

### Sign Extender and Shifter

The sign extender takes the immediate value and sign extends it if the
current instruction is signed operation. It also has a shifted output
for branch address calculation.

### Register File

The data storage in the CPU is the register bank contained within the
Instruction decode stage. This bank of registers is directly referenced
from the ARM Thumb instructions and is designed to allow to access the
data and avoid the use of much slower data memory.The registers are
defined as being written in the negative edge of the clock and read in
the positive edge.This is done to avoid hazards when one instruction is
attempting to write to the register bank while the other is reading.

### Execute Stage

The execute stage is responsible for performing the specified
operations.The execute stage consist of ALU , branch determiner and the
forwarding unit. It connects these components together so that the ALU
processes the data properly given inputs chosen by the forwarding unit
and will notify the decode stage if a branch is indeed to be taken.

##### ALU

The ALU is responsible for performing the actual calculation specified
by the instruction. It takes two 16 bit inputs and opcode from the
decode block and gives a single 16 bit output along with the Program
status registers.

##### Branch Determiner

The Branch determiner is responsible for looking at the output of ALU ,
and the type of instruction it is decoding and determining whether the
system is to branch or not.

For example in case of BLE (Branch if less than or equal) branch must be
taken when if flags Z set, or N set and V clear, or N clear and V
set.[@TDMI_DS]

Implementation of forwarding block is shown in Figure.

![Source:
<span>[@Patterson]</span>](Images/forwarding.jpg)


### Writeback Stage

The write back stage is responsible for writing the calculated value
back to the proper register.It has input control lines that tells
whether the instruction writes back the output of ALU to memory or not.

### Push and Pop Instruction

Pushing to stack and Popping data back from stack to registers is
implemented as a FSM shown in the following Figure.

![FSM for Push and Pop instructions](Images/fsm.pdf)

RTL verification
----------------

Test benches are used to simulate design without the need of any
physical hardware. The biggest benefit of this is that it inspects every
signal that is in the design. The overall CPU block is responsible for
tying all of the stages together as well as providing the access to the
outside world that the test bench uses to load instruction memory and
monitor the register bank for test verification.\
The test bench for the CPU involved two different sections in order to
allow the testing of the CPU block as shown in Figure \[fig:testbench\].
The first section that was part of the test bench was the code that was
responsible for loading the instruction memory within the CPU.This
memory is what would run the instructions through the pipeline once the
CPU was allowed to start. The instructions that were loaded included
register based and immediate adds, subtracts (both signed and unsigned),
reading and writing data memory, and a loop that would force the CPU to
jump back to the start of instruction memory and execute those same
instructions again[@MIPS_paper]. The different adds were important
because each exercised different parts of the CPU including the data
forwarding unit, multiple registers and different functions within the
ALU itself.The jump instruction is important and also in that it
exercised the branch detection unit, hazard detection unit as well as
the ability of the instruction fetch stage to be able to jump to an
address and continue execution with only the input of a single stall
cycle.

![RTL Verification Block diagram](Images/testbench-crop.pdf)

Synthesis
---------

A synthesis tool takes an RTL hardware description and standard cell
library as input and produces a gate level netlist as output[@iitkgp].
The resulting gate level list is completely a structural description
with standard cells of the design.It is not necessary that the Verilog
is functionally correct ,it must be written in such a way that it
directs the synthesis tool to generate good hardware. Verilog are tied
to particular clock cycles. The synthesized netlist exhibits the same
clock-by-clock cycle behavior, allowing the RTL testbench to be easily
re-used for gate-level simulation. Design Vision was used for
synthesizing our designed processor.

Unpipelined Processor
=====================

The motive for multi cycle implementation for THUMB processor is to
improve the performance of Single cycle Thumb processor which executes
all instructions in 1 cycle. The main problem in Single cycle processor
is, as all instructions are executed concurrently in one cycle, the
components cannot be used more than once in a cycle. To make this design
more efficient, sharing of the component can be made possible by making
it have multiple input and outputs selected by a multiplexer.The control
signals for such multiplexers are decided using the finite state
machine. The individual components are connected as per the figure.

![Unpipelined block diagram<span
data-label="fig:unpipe"></span>](Images/unpipelined_blk_diagram.png)

Evaluation
==========

The comparison of the obtained specifications are listed in Table
below. Features like power, Maximum operating frequency and
processing time is better in un pipelined architecture compared to
pipelined architecture. However the processing time is the basis for
performance and throughput .An interesting aspect about the processing
time achieved in pipelined and un pipelined stages is the that, though 5
stage pipeline is used the execution time or the performance has not
increased 5 folds as expected. This is the result of adding stalls in
Hazard block. Hence the measure of performance is not just dependent on
the number of pipelined stages but also the type of instructions
executed and the frequency at which stalls are inserted in the data
path.

  **Feature**        | **Pipelined**  | **Un-Pipelined**
  -------------------| ---------------| ------------------
  Area               | 3783.4 units   |8649 units
  Power              | 2.0583 mW      | 2.1109 mW
  Critical time      | .35 nS         | .25 nS
  Maximum Frequency  | 2.857 GHZ      | 4 GHz
  Execution time     | 2184956 pS     | 337300 pS

  Comparison of Pipelined and Unpipelined

Following Timing report is obtained for a Clock period of 0.35 nS.
$$\therefore  Max\_{frequency} = \frac{1}{0.35 nS} = 2.86 GHz$$ .

Conclusion
==========

As a result of this work,Thumb processor with pipelined stages is
implemented using Verilog Hardware description language and a throughput
better than Unpipelined architecture is achieved.The design is
synthesize-able and achieves the required goals of the project.

Future work
-----------

-   The processor performance can optimized by inserting stalls
    intelligently .

-   Dynamic Branch prediction algorithm can be implemented inside the
    processor

-   Gate level simulation needs further debugging

Referrences
===========

This appendix documents the software tools used for this project.


   **Tool**                | **Version**
  ------------------------ |---------------
   ModelSim                | SE-64 10.3d
   Synopsis Design Vision  | 2013.12-SP5-3


- The Thumb instruction set,\
*http://apt.cs.manchester.ac.uk/ftp/pub/apt/peve/PEVE05/Slides/05\_Thumb.pdf*


- Pipelined Processor Design,04/25/07, Luke Harvey and Stephanie
Spielbauer 

- Addison Wesley - *ARM System-on-Chip Architecture*, 2Ed.pdf. .

- Organization of Computer Systems: Pipelining. \[Online\]. Available:
*https://www.cise.ufl.edu/Â mssz/CompOrg/CDA-pipe.html*. \[Accessed:
02-Aug-2017\].

- Organization of Computer Systems: Processor & Datapath.
\[Online\]. Available:
*https://www.cise.ufl.edu/Â mssz/CompOrg/CDA-proc.html*. \[Accessed:
01-Aug-2017\].

- ARM Architecture Reference Manual ARMv7-A and ARMv7-R edition Errata
markup Copyright 1996-1998, 2000, 2004-2011 ARM Limited.

- ARM7TDMI Data Sheet Copyright ARM Limited.

- Patterson, D.A. and J.L. Hennesey. Computer Organization and Design: The
Hardware/Software Interface, Second Edition, San Francisco, CA: Morgan
Kaufman (1998).

- Vhdl Implementation of A Mips-32 Pipeline Processor, Kirat Pal Singh,
Shivani Parmar

- IIT Lab tutorial
http://www.facweb.iitkgp.ernet.in/Â isg/TESTING/SLIDES/Tutorial2b.pdf
